Stemming and Lemmatization in Python

This tutorial covers the introduction to Stemming & Lemmatization used in Text and Natural Language Processing.

Stemming and Lemmatization are Text Normalization (or sometimes called Word Normalization) techniques in the field of Natural Language Processing that are used to prepare text, words, and documents for further processing. Stemming and Lemmatization have been studied, and algorithms have been developed in Computer Science since the 1960's. In this tutorial you will learn about Stemming and Lemmatization in a practical approach covering the background, some famous algorithms, applications of Stemming and Lemmatization, and how to stem and lemmatize words, sentences and documents using the Python nltk package which is the Natural Language Tool Kit package provided by Python for Natural Language Processing tasks.

Background
Languages we speak and write are made up of several words often derived from one another. When a language contains words that are derived from another word as their use in the speech changes is called Inflected Language.

"In grammar, inflection is the modification of a word to express different grammatical categories such as tense, case, voice, aspect, person, number, gender, and mood. An inflection expresses one or more grammatical categories with a prefix, suffix or infix, or another internal modification such as a vowel change" [Wikipedia]

The degree of inflection may be higher or lower in a language. As you have read the definition of inflection with respect to grammar, you can understand that an inflected word(s) will have a common root form. Let's look at a few examples,
        Playing --> Play  |
        Plays --> Play    |- Common root from 'play'
        Played --> Play   |

        am, are, is ---> be
        Car, cars, car's, cars' ---> car
    Using above mapping a sentence could be normalized as follows:
        the boy'scars are different colors ---> the boy car be differ color

Above examples must have helped you understand the concept of normalization of text, although normalization of text is not restricted to only written document but to speech as well. Stemming and Lemmatization helps us to achieve the root forms (sometimes called synonyms in search context) of inflected (derived) words. Stemming is different to Lemmatization in the approach it uses to produce root forms of words and the word produced.
